Shared element transitions to view transitions (#4181)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/docs/web-platform/view-transitions/index.md

---
layout: 'layouts/doc-post.njk'
title: Smooth and simple transitions with the View Transitions API
authors:
  - jakearchibald
description: >
  The View Transition API allows page transitions within single-page apps, and will later include multi-page apps.
date: 2021-08-17
updated: 2022-08-02
---

{% Aside %}
This feature was previously called "Shared Element Transitions", and is sometimes referred to as "page transitions".
{% endAside %}

The View Transition API makes it easy to change the DOM in a single step, while creating an animated transition between the two states.

> It's currently behind the `chrome://flags/#document-transition` flag in Chrome 109+.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's currently behind the `chrome://flags/#view-transition` flag in Chrome 109+.
```

Vlad is about to land a change to flip this.

## Standardization status

The feature is being developed within the [W3C CSS Working Group](https://www.w3.org/groups/wg/css) as a [draft specification](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-view-transitions-1/).

Once we're happy with the API design, we'll start the processes and checks required to ship this feature to stable.

> Developer feedback is really important, so please [file issues on GitHub](https://github.com/WICG/shared-element-transitions/) with suggestions and questions.

Author: lol, yes. When I encountered this bit in the rewrite, I asked you about it, but then forgot to make the actual change. Good catch.

Ok, a cross-fade isn't that impressive. Thankfully, transitions can be customized, but before we get to that, we need to understand how this basic cross-fade worked.

{% Aside %}
Demo links in this article are less visually impressive, but also have a tiny codebase. The goal is to make it easier to read and understand all of the code, without knowing any particular SPA framework.
{% endAside %}

## How these transitions work

Taking the code sample from above:

```js
document.startViewTransition(() => updateTheDOMSomehow(data));
```

When `.startViewTransition()` is called, the API captures the current state of the page. This includes taking a screenshot.

Once that's complete, the callback passed to `.startViewTransition()` is called. That's where the DOM is changed. Then, the API captures the new state of the page.

Once the state is captured, the API constructs a pseudo-element tree like this:

```diff
::view-transition
└─ ::view-transition-group(root)

>    └─ ::view-transition-image-set(root)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   └─ ::view-transition-image-pair(root)
```

      ├─ ::view-transition-old(root)
      └─ ::view-transition-new(root)
```

> The `::view-transition` sits in a top-layer, over everything else on the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `::view-transition` sits in an overlay, over everything else on the page.
```

Technically not the "top layer" used by fullscreen or dialog. But IIUC you're just hitting at the fact thats its conceptually an overlay over everything else on the page

That CSS declaration caused the pseudo-element tree to change:

```diff
::view-transition
├─ ::view-transition-group(root)

> │  └─ ::view-transition-image-set(root)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
│  └─ ::view-transition-image-pair(root)
```

│     ├─ ::view-transition-old(root)
│     └─ ::view-transition-new(root)
└─ ::view-transition-group(main-header)

>    └─ ::view-transition-image-set(main-header)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   └─ ::view-transition-image-pair(main-header)
```

The default transition is to cross-fade, which means the thumbnail could be cross-fading with a not-yet-loaded full image.

One way to handle this is to wait for the full image to load before starting the transition. Ideally this would be done before calling `.startViewTransition()`, so the page remains interactive, and a spinner can be shown to indicate to the user that things are loading. But in this case there's a better way:

```css
::view-transition-old(full-embed),
::view-transition-new(full-embed) {
  /* Prevent the default animation,
  so both views remain opacity:1 throughout the transition */
  animation: none;
  /* Use normal blending,
  so the new view sits on top and obscures the old view */
  mix-blend-mode: normal;
}
```

Now the thumbnail doesn't fade away, it just sits underneath the full image. This means if the new view hasn't loaded, the thumbnail is visible throughout the transition. This means the transition can start straight away, and the full image can load in its own time.

> This wouldn't work if the new view featured transparency, but in this case we know it doesn't, so we can make this optimization.

Reviewer: Doesn't need to be in this edit but your example for keeping a video playing throughout the transition is also a good one to add here. This came up with 2 different partners.

Showing how it can be made seamless by keeping the DOM change instant + hiding the old image is a cool pattern!

Author: Agreed. I'll start making notes for things that should be added for the next pass of this article.

```js
async function switchView(data) {
  // Fallback for browsers that don't support this API:
  if (!document.startViewTransition) {
    await updateTheDOM(data);
    return;
  }

  const transition = document.startViewTransition(async () => {
    await updateTheDOM(data);
  });

  await transition.ready;

  document.documentElement.animate(
    {
      clipPath: [`inset(50%)`, `inset(0)`],
    },
    {
      duration: 500,
      easing: 'ease-in',
      pseudoElement: '::view-transition-new(root)',
    }
  );
}
```

{% endCompare %}

The problem with this example is that `switchView()` will reject if the _transition_ cannot reach a `ready` state, but that doesn't mean that the view failed to switch. The DOM may have successfully updated, but there were duplicate `view-transition-name`s, so the transition was skipped.

Instead:

{% Compare 'better' %}

```js
async function switchView(data) {
  // Fallback for browsers that don't support this API:
  if (!document.startViewTransition) {
    await updateTheDOM(data);
    return;
  }

  const transition = document.startViewTransition(async () => {
    await updateTheDOM(data);
  });

  animateFromMiddle(transition);

>   await transition.domUpdated;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  await transition.finished;
```

Is finished a better fit if you want this function to return once the DOM has flipped to the new state, either with the animations finishing or directly?

Author: I think there are cases for one or the other. I'll add a note/comment.

    This is useful for [animating the transition pseudo-elements with JavaScript](#animating-with-javascript).

`viewTransition.finished`
: A promise that fulfills once the end state is fully visible and interactive to the user.

    It only rejects if `domUpdateCallback` returns a rejected promise, as this indicates the end state wasn't created.

    Otherwise, if a transition fails to begin, or is skipped during the transition, the end state is still reached, so `finished` fulfills.

`viewTransition.skipTransition()`
: Skip the animation part of the transition.

    This won't skip calling `domUpdateCallback`, as the DOM change is separate to the transition.

## Default style and transition reference

`::view-transition`
: The root pseudo-element which fills the viewport and contains each `::view-transition-group`.

`::view-transition-group`
: Absolutely positioned.

    Transitions `width` and `height` between the 'before' and 'after' states.

    Transitions `transform` between the 'before' and 'after' viewport-space quad.

> `::view-transition-image-set`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`::view-transition-image-pair`
```

## Transitions as an enhancement

The View Transition API is designed to 'wrap' a DOM change and create a transition for it. However, the transition should be treated as an enhancement, as in, your app shouldn't enter an 'error' state if the DOM change succeeds, but the transition fails. Ideally the transition shouldn't fail, but if it does, it shouldn't break the rest of the user experience.

In order to treat transitions as an enhancement, take care not to use transition promises in a way that would cause your app to throw if the transition fails.

{% Compare 'worse' %}

```js
async function switchView(data) {
  // Fallback for browsers that don't support this API:
  if (!document.startViewTransition) {
    await updateTheDOM(data);
    return;
  }

  const transition = document.startViewTransition(async () => {
    await updateTheDOM(data);
  });

  await transition.ready;

  document.documentElement.animate(
    {
      clipPath: [`inset(50%)`, `inset(0)`],
    },
    {
      duration: 500,
      easing: 'ease-in',
      pseudoElement: '::view-transition-new(root)',
    }
  );
}
```

{% endCompare %}

> The problem with this example is that `switchView()` will reject if the _transition_ cannot reach a `ready` state, but that doesn't mean that the view failed to switch. The DOM may have successfully updated, but there were duplicate `view-transition-name`s, so the transition was skipped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The problem with this example is that `switchView()` will reject if the transition cannot reach a `ready` state, but that doesn't mean that the view failed to switch. The DOM may have successfully updated, but there were duplicate `view-transition-name`s, so the transition was skipped.
```
